From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams [music]
and this is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> When a US peace plan to end the war in
Ukraine was leaked last week,
it looked to many like it had been
written by Russia.
And to a large degree, it had [music]
been. And it sparked a global outcry
that has forced American officials to
backtrack, [music] revise, and rethink
their approach in the days since.
Today,
my colleagues Kim [music] Barker and
David Sanger
on the backroom process that led to the
controversial [music] plan and why it
comes at a vulnerable moment for
Ukraine's leader.
>> [music]
[music]
>> It's Wednesday, November 26th.
Before we start, I just have one
question, Kim. What is that hat? Oh,
this is like this crazy hat that is made
of feathers. I I love it. I I had lost
it for a long time and I just found it.
So, that's the hat I'm wearing now. Oh
my god, it looks it looks great. I
couldn't tell if it was actually like
one of those Soviet type hats that I is
like very furry and very warm, so.
>> It'll be coming with me back to Kyiv.
Amazing. It's cold there, man. I've
heard.
Kim Barker, welcome to the show. Thanks
very much for having me.
So, there has been a lot of news about
the war in Ukraine this past week and a
possible peace plan that might actually
end it. But, this is not the first time
that we have heard about plans to end
the war and it is kind of hard to tell
at this point what is real movement and
what is not. So, we're turning to you to
try to understand what's happened.
You've spent a lot of time in Ukraine,
you've covered the war.
What do you make of what has happened in
the past few days?
Yeah, it's been very confusing and a bit
of whiplash in Ukraine as well with what
happened last Thursday when this
28-point peace plan was leaked.
And all of a sudden
everybody in Ukraine is looking at this
peace plan and they're looking at every
single point and saying to themselves,
this sounds an awful lot like Russian
talking points, like everything Russia
ever wanted. But then at the same time,
they're hearing that this is an American
plan and there's a lot of pressure for
Ukraine to accept it right away.
>> Mhm. And you have to understand the
situation on the ground right now.
You've got people who are very tired of
this war going on for years and I think
a lot of Ukrainians, if you were to ask
them, they would say, yes, let's get
some sort of peace deal that's not too
bad for Ukraine, right? They would like
to get something.
But, at the same time, you've got this
issue along the front lines where you've
got not enough troops and then you've
got on a nightly basis this barrage of
missiles and drones coming in and
attacking civilian targets.
Given all of that, it makes total sense
why Ukrainians would be so desperate to
end the war.
But, you also mentioned this peace plan
that was leaked that has seemed to, at
least initially, heavily favor Russia.
And I just wonder, given that, how did
Ukrainians react to it? I mean,
universally, the word that we heard over
and over again was capitulation. I heard
it from people who were waiting for
their relatives, their dead relatives to
be taken out of this building that had
been hit by missiles a couple days
before. Capitulation.
>> [snorts]
>> And disgust. And the idea that like, no,
we have lost too much blood. The idea
that we're just going to give up
everything we've been fighting for for
nothing? Mhm. No.
And also, at the same time, you have to
understand that this proposal is coming
along when Ukrainian President Volodymyr
Zelenskyy could not be in a weaker
position politically because of this
corruption scandal, you know, that's
unfolded in the last couple of weeks.
So, tell us about that. Where does that
story start? Well, that story starts
about 15 months ago when an
investigation called Operation Midas
started into a company called
Energoatom, which is this a nuclear
power giant in Ukraine.
And it's a state-owned company.
And the country's anti-corruption
agencies have been investigating this
company for about 15 months. They've got
wiretaps of like more than a thousand
hours and they're basically looking at
key allies of President Zelenskyy who
are accused of embezzling a hundred
million dollars from this company and it
first comes out into public knowledge on
Monday morning, November 10th, when the
country's anti-corruption agencies
unveiled the series of videos outlining
a huge corruption scheme and their
investigation.
And then over the next two days, [music]
these videos unroll every few hours
giving more and more salacious details.
And they feature a detective who's very
well-lit, very well-produced and you're
listening to it and you're feeling like,
oh, this is dramatic, something's
happening here.
And then you go into these sort of like
wiretapped conversations
of these people who have given
themselves code names like Rocket and
Sugar Man and Che Guevara and the
Professor.
And you learn through these videos that
some of the money that these guys are
making is coming from money that was
supposed to be spent to build shelters,
to protect things like nuclear power
substations and power transformers and
things like that from Russian missiles
and drones.
>> [laughter]
>> And each episode ends with something
like, you know, more to come and to be
continued.
And it really has got Ukrainians glued
to their phones.
So, it sounds like basically, if I have
this right, this anti-corruption agency
is releasing almost like a mini-series
about the scandal to the public? Yeah, I
mean, I made that joke in the very
beginning to an editor. I'm like, it
kind of feels like Netflix and then
started looking at all the sort of
social media that was being put out
there and it's exactly what Ukrainians
were saying. You had like the memes of
Bill Hader eating popcorn waiting for
the next thing to drop and you had this
sense that, oh my god, is this going to
actually reach the president? Is this
going to reach the president's chief of
staff? Who is going to be on these tapes
next?
I'm obviously no expert in Ukrainian
anti-corruption investigations, but at
least in the United States, that kind of
announcement would be a bit unusual. Why
would they release videos like this as
opposed to just, I don't know, a press
conference? Yeah, I mean, in the states,
anywhere really, you would have a lawyer
standing behind a lectern and like
reading out the charges or maybe they
would just be filed in paper. You
wouldn't have the sense of like, we're
going to have a promotional series of
videos around our investigation before
we've even brought anybody to court,
right? It's very unusual. I mean, one of
the goals clearly could be to inoculate
the agencies against any sort of
blowback from the president's office.
They get the people on their side. They
get an audience and that seemed to be
happening over the first couple of days.
Tell me more about that. What was the
reaction from Ukrainians to these
videos?
They were horrified. People are making
money off of shelters that are supposed
to protect us from Russian missile and
drone attack, especially when you have
us going into a winter right now where
Mhm. it's pretty touch-and-go with the
power situation. Russia has really been
targeting all these places that generate
power and you've got blackouts going
pretty much around the clock. So,
there's a sense of indignation hearing
these people, hearing these men talk on
these wiretaps about making money off of
this. It's gross, it's disgusting and
Ukrainians were quite upset. You know,
Zelenskyy rode into office on
anti-corruption pledges, right? And
there is a war. There's a war that means
that it's martial law, you can't elect
somebody new and this is their
president. They want the country to hold
together. But, for the first time, you
had this sense that opposition was
forming against Zelenskyy. You had the
sense that the political parties were
getting together. There were calls for a
vote of no confidence in parliament.
What is Zelenskyy's response been to the
scandal? I mean, Zelenskyy's response to
the scandal has been, look, if there's
anybody, you know, guilty of corruption
in this administration or anywhere, they
should pay in court. Anybody who commits
corruption needs to face the
consequences, right? But, he has not
been specific about these charges. He's
not talked about his allies who have
been accused of this.
His chief of staff, after these
accusations first appeared, disappeared
for more than 5 days, which was highly
unusual. So, it felt like the
administration was just kind of going
quiet, seeing if it was going to blow
over and then they would figure it out.
But, it was not blowing over. It was not
blowing over at all. It was snowballing
until this peace plan leaked. And this
peace plan was very beneficial to
Russia. In fact, it looked as if Russia
had written some of the proposals.
Among them, Ukraine would never be able
to join NATO, ever.
Ukraine would permanently have to have a
smaller military.
Ukraine would have to cede territory
that Russia hadn't even won yet.
All of these being non-starters,
basically, for Ukraine.
>> All of these are non-starters,
especially the idea of having a smaller
military. If you look at the history of
how Russia has been trying to take a
bite of Ukraine there, a bite of Ukraine
here, right? Like, it's it's not going
to happen. People are not going to
accept that. But, also, at the same
time,
there was a lot of pressure coming from
America, like, "Make this deal, sign
this deal, accept this peace,
and like, let's move on." And you have
this sense that maybe this peace plan
was coming out, maybe it was being
pushed because Zelenskyy looked so weak
that he had no choice but to accept it.
But, that is not what happened. Instead,
it was the opposite.
Zelenskyy came out, and he's returning
to his
early wartime president sort of
disposition, where he's doing these
videos, and he's very serious, and he's
telling the country that
They have a choice right now. It's one
of the toughest choices they've had. Are
we going to sacrifice our dignity, or
are we going to be willing to lose this
key partner? That partner being the
United States.
>> [music]
>> And instead of being in the very weak
position that Zelenskyy had been in just
a day before, even hours before,
you have Zelenskyy
>> [music]
>> as defiant leader, and the country
rallying around what he is saying, which
is,
>> [music]
>> "We're not going to simply give in."
But, it still has left Zelenskyy in a
really hard position, because he's
facing dealing with [music] this peace
plan, dealing with America, whose
support he would like to keep, and
dealing with the Trump administration,
and wanting to look like they're playing
ball,
>> [music]
>> like they're trying to negotiate in good
faith to get a deal to end this war,
which is what the Trump administration
really, really wants. But, he's got to
somehow do that without sacrificing
everything. [music]
And that is why Zelenskyy finds himself
between a rock and a hard place.
>> [music]
[music]
>> After the break, David Sanger explains
where this peace [music] plan actually
came from,
and the diplomatic scramble it set off.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> David, we just heard from Kim Barker
about how this leaked peace plan was so
poorly received in Ukraine, because it
seemed like it might as well have been
written by Russia. It seemed so
incredibly lopsided. Is that your take?
Well, certainly that's my take, and
after it leaked, the first thing I wrote
was
it read like it had been drafted in the
Kremlin. And the reason for that is
parts of it, it turned out,
essentially had been, because they
talked to the Russian representative as
they began to to develop this weeks
before they got to the Ukrainians.
And so, the first draft of it was
incredibly pro-Russian, and basically
gave Vladimir Putin everything he
wanted. Now, when you go and you probe
with the administration, "How did this
happen?"
Their immediate answer is, "Well, we
were trying to replicate
our success in Gaza."
Now, Rachel, you remember that, cuz we
talked about it a lot, and you and I
were in Israel together when that
agreement came to fruition, and the
hostages were released, and that also
was a 20-point plan, right? And they had
put it together by sitting down with the
Israelis, and getting a list of their
demands and their red lines and all
that, and then, through cutouts and
representatives, basically doing the
same thing with Hamas, and then going
back to try to force compromises in
certain areas. And so, soon after the
president returned from Israel,
Jared Kushner, his son-in-law, who the
president had called in on this one
again, and who had played a central role
in the Gaza negotiations, and Steve
Witkoff, his envoy for everything,
and J.D. Vance, the vice president, and
Marco Rubio's got two important titles
here, secretary of state and national
security advisor, all met together, and
basically, they argued to the president,
"Hey, let's try with Ukraine and Russia
exactly what we did in Gaza."
And the president gave them a green
light, in part because, Rachel, he
didn't have any other options.
So, they started with having a Russian
representative, Harvard Business School
educated head of Russia's sovereign
wealth fund, come to Miami and meet with
Witkoff and with Jared Kushner,
and basically laid out Russia's
concerns. A lot of that was in the
document. And it wasn't until weeks
later
that they began to sit and talk to the
Ukrainians. They never talked to the
Europeans,
and then, of course, the document
leaked. And as soon as it did, it
triggered that uproar. The Europeans
felt cut out by President Trump yet
again, the Ukrainians felt betrayed yet
again, and the Russians were celebrating
because the early version of the
document looked like their wish list.
Okay, so Ukraine was involved in
negotiation, but the ultimate product
here was really one-sided and favored
Russia. Is that kind of another
similarity here between what's happening
with Ukraine and the Gaza deal? Meaning
specifically that the administration, at
the end of the day, is really trying to
force a plan through that heavily favors
one side.
Well, you're certainly right, Rachel,
that the Ukrainians came in and were
consulted, but they came in very late.
It was only about a week before
the actual document leaked out. And so,
the version that we all saw last week
really didn't reflect the Ukrainian
point of view.
Now, there two ways to interpret that.
One is that they had had enough time to
begin to go back and forth and amend the
document. That's the version of events
that administration officials have put
out.
The other way to look at it is that this
administration fundamentally has run out
of patience and sympathy for the
Ukrainians here.
That the president believes that they're
going to have to give up land sooner or
later, so they might as well just get
accustomed to that.
And of course, you've got some split
views within the administration.
Vice President Vance made clear through
the entire campaign he doesn't
particularly care about Ukraine. He just
wants to make sure the United States
gets out, isn't sucked into another
forever war.
Marco Rubio, on the other hand, as a
senator,
voted to aid Ukraine, and spoke out
quite vociferously about the need to
defend Ukrainian democracy. It was only
after he entered the administration that
he began to adopt President Trump's
view, as you would expect an
administration official would. You know,
it's sort of interesting, though,
because the way that you described Marco
Rubio's stance, at least initially,
vis-à-vis Ukraine, was more of a
traditional foreign policy approach,
like not that much different from Biden,
in the sense that he was in favor of
supporting Ukraine. And now you're
saying that he has switched his
attitude, essentially, and adopted this
very much more America first, get out of
foreign entanglements at any cost that
we have seen from J.D. Vance and other
people in the administration.
I'm not sure that's entirely right,
Rachel, because Marco Rubio's true views
seem to pop out when this document
leaked last week. And all of a sudden,
his first reaction to it was, "Oh, this
is just an initial set of talking
points." I think he said at one point,
"It's a living document. It's going to
change." Right? It's just a starting
point.
And yet, the president took a very
different position.
Trump said, "This is a great plan. It's
great for Ukraine. Zelenskyy has until
Thanksgiving Day to agree to it, or go
off and he's going to fight his his own
little wars again," hinting without
saying
that he might be doing that without much
American support.
So, it was becoming pretty evident to
Secretary Rubio
that this negotiation had somehow
escaped his hands.
But, Rubio clearly felt the need to
seize this back. And suddenly, on
Saturday morning, we heard that he was
getting on his plane on an unscheduled
trip to go to Geneva
and meet both the Europeans and the
Ukrainians
to try to put down the incredible uproar
that the leak of this early draft had
created.
>> Mhm. Because the Europeans felt like
this draft of a peace accord not only
sold Ukraine down the river,
it sold their own security down the
river. And you heard that directly from
the German Chancellor, Friedrich Merz,
who said outright, "This isn't just
about Ukraine. This is about the
security of Europe. It's about the
security of NATO nations." The Europeans
clearly see this as much more
existential than the conflict in Gaza.
That's absolutely right.
Okay, so what happens next?
So on Sunday, there were 11 hours of
meetings. Withkoff is there. Jared
Kushner is there.
It's pretty heated from what we hear,
particularly with the Ukrainians.
But magically, the 28-point plan turned
into a 20-point plan.
Mhm. Suddenly gone from this was a limit
on the Ukrainian military to be no more
than 600,000 troops. Suddenly gone from
this was that NATO troops could never be
based in Ukraine. So he clearly was
trying to wrench this document back to
the middle
in an effort to save the peace process.
But along the way, he may have lost the
Russians.
>> [snorts]
>> And that is the big question here,
right, David? Because as you and I have
discussed on the show multiple times
before, Russia has been extremely
consistent since the start of the war
about what it wants and what it would
consider victory, and they haven't
wavered from that at all. So the idea
that a new peace plan that would be more
favorable to Ukraine coming out of
Geneva, that almost seems like it would
be a non-starter, right? So you have
almost have to wonder, what is the point
or the good of this plan at all?
Well, clearly the president believed
that by setting up this Thanksgiving
deadline
that he was going to rush something
through and he would have an agreement.
And a cynic might say that the president
was interested in speed because he wants
to add an agreement between Russia and
Ukraine to that list for the Nobel Peace
Prize that he believes he's been
nominated for
for next year.
And he regularly made the absolutely
correct point that
it is one of the great human tragedies
that we're losing thousands of
Ukrainians and Russians
every single week here, and he just
wants to get to something that will stop
the killing. The question is, at what
cost?
And how much pain does he believe Putin
will put up with? David, this is
reminding me of a characteristic that we
often see with President Trump, which is
that he often likes to tout a victory
with the details to be worked out later.
And
that seems like it is maybe a dynamic
that is playing out here, because it
feels like from everything you are
saying, the goal is to end the war in
Ukraine by hook or by crook, and not
necessarily to uphold any particularly
strongly held principles in the process.
Is that fair?
That's exactly right, Rachel. If you
think about how former President Biden
talked about this war from the beginning
of the invasion,
he always said, "We're here to
reestablish
the rules of the post-World War II
order.
That countries don't invade each other's
borders. That countries don't take each
other over. That this era of, you know,
land wars in Europe we were done with at
the end of World War II."
President Trump doesn't talk in those
terms.
>> [snorts]
>> He says, "Just tell me what it will take
to get it
because this is a power competition
between Ukraine and Russia. Russia's got
nuclear weapons. It's a much larger
country. It's going to win any power
contest. So let's just define where
those borders are and acknowledge that
it's the stronger state."
Now,
we have to open up the possibility here
that clunky as this entire process over
the past couple of days has been,
that President Trump
might actually be able to capitalize on
the fact that they have something on the
table here,
that the Russians and the Ukrainians are
finally engaged to get to something that
resembles a ceasefire, if not a full
peace agreement.
And the question is,
can he
properly assess when the Russians have
suffered enough that the pain is too
great,
or when the Ukrainians have come to the
conclusion at a moment of weakness for
them because of the corruption scandals,
because they're losing territory,
that they're better to cut a deal.
He thinks this may be the moment, and
maybe he's [music] right.
We all have to hope so.
But this certainly has been an example
of [music] pretty awkward diplomacy.
Maybe from here it gets better. [music]
David, thank you so much. Thanks,
Rachel.
>> [music]
>> On Tuesday evening, Russia launched a
deadly barrage of missiles and drones at
the Ukrainian capital as Kremlin
officials signaled they would resist
changes negotiated by Ukraine to
President Trump's peace plan.
The president, meanwhile, said he'd
backed off the Thanksgiving Day deadline
and that his envoy, Steve Witkoff, would
be traveling soon to Moscow to meet with
the Russian president, Vladimir Putin.
We'll be [music] right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
The six Democratic members of Congress
who recorded a video telling troops they
could refuse illegal orders said they
were being investigated by the FBI.
>> [music]
>> The group, which included veterans of
the military and the CIA, said the
bureau had requested interviews with
them. Though it's unclear what, if any
laws, [music] the videos could have
violated. In a statement, the four House
members said that the president was,
quote, "using the FBI as a tool to
intimidate and harass members of
Congress." [music]
And
Dr. Ralph Abraham, a [music] critic of
vaccines who's called the COVID
vaccinations dangerous, has been named
second in command at the CDC.
>> [music]
>> As Louisiana surgeon general, Abraham
had ordered the state to stop promoting
vaccinations. And his appointment was
not announced [music] by the CDC at all.
Instead, it appeared on an internal
database with a start date of November
23rd.
Dr. Abraham's views on some issues align
with those of Health Secretary Robert F.
Kennedy Jr., including when he endorsed
the unproven link
>> [music]
>> between taking Tylenol during pregnancy
and autism.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode produced by Moot Saedi,
Alex Stern, and Anna Foley.
It was edited by Maria Byrne with
[music] help from Brendan Klinkenberg
and Paige Cowett.
Contains music by Marion Lozano and Dan
Powell.
And was engineered [music] by Chris
Wood.
Special thanks to Alexandra Mikulichan
and Sasha Duckworth.
>> [music]
>> That's it for the daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.
>> [music]